all all glass and graphics handles is my work but um and that's that's enough to
keep audrey quite quite busy but uh that's that's what it's all about okay oh
don't ask me well the title comes from a song by the beatles if you don't know
that and uh we always get funny responses when we make phone orders to our
wholesalers or whatever you know if somebody hasn't heard the name of the
company they'll we always have to spell it out but uh I chose the G-O just
because I like the way the letter forms go together and so our logo is is a G
and an O that are intertwined what's on your ring well this ring is uh is my
sigil my signature it's almost a brand it's a combination of a W and an M put
together and uh originally it was more calligraphic and feeling it was uh it was
the flowing M and a W combined and as I got into doing more and more science
fiction the edges on my signature got harder and harder and um now it's it's
it's more of a hard edge type of thing who knows maybe it'll change in the
future but I had someone tell me by the way that um my paintings wouldn't be
worth much because I didn't sign them with my full name that I used this
signature that was like a brand and for three paintings four paintings I signed
my name full out I signed it Whelan and that was the white dragon the other two
dragon books I did for mccaffrey and a book by Poul anderson but after doing
those it just didn't feel right to sign my name it just wasn't my signature to
me so I went back to using this this uh mw in a circle and that's the way it's
going to stay no matter what anybody says I guess definitely your priority yeah
yeah well I found it hasn't made us a bit of difference really in terms of sales
of my artwork so I shouldn't have listened to that person's advice let's go
ahead and move on down okay yeah let's start with our work how did you get
contacted to do this particular one they just called me up said I want to do it
I said sure um I'm a real fan of 2001 you know that's probably my favorite movie
of all time and so um I really wanted to do the do the cover to that particular
book but the um the problem is they they weren't sure how they wanted to try to
present the book to the to the public so I did probably 12 concepts for that
cover and I was equally disposed to all the different ways of approaching it and
I chose this one originally I thought of composing it so that the spaceship
looked like a baby's rattle in the hands of the baby but they didn't go for that
they wanted more front and center so um there it is but I probably would have
chosen not to have the spaceship in the painting at all and to amplify this
concept more but it's the first painting I did that was almost entirely
airbrushed this is all airbrushed around here it's really just the spaceship
that is put in by hand as it were then there's the time that you got airbrushed
um strangely enough I didn't care a whole lot for the book or not as much as I
had hoped I would I felt that Arthur didn't answer many of the important
questions raised in both the books you know the motivation of the aliens what
the ultimate destiny of earth would be etc etc none of that was answered and
that that left me feeling cheated a little bit so but I enjoyed doing the
painting what about the gold green you've been doing the piper stuff it's shaky
isn't it you've been doing the piper stuff ever since they came out the
beginning right since they started reprinting um the concept behind this is that
the fuzzies are not indigenous to this planet they've crash landed from they're
an alien species even to this alien planet and they've lost the entire record of
their previous world in the ship which was buried in a landslide and so a lot of
what this book has to do about is is the succeeding loss of knowledge from
generation to generation each younger generation learns a little bit less than
the previous one about their previous lifestyle their technology and everything
and that's what's symbolized by this bright red butterfly that's flying out of
reach of this younger fuzzy here the golden dream is in fact the hope that
someday the fuzzies will have picked up the distress call before it was cut off
by the landslide and will one day come to rescue the ones that have been
stranded on this planet and that's why this one is off looking towards the sky
that's pretty much what's involved with this painting and I like exploring the
environment and coming up with the different plants and all that kind of stuff
that one won the Hugo right well you win a Hugo for the work you've done over
the period of a year or whatever you know as best artist or whatever so it's not
for this particular piece this won best show at the science fiction convention
the world science fiction convention park show yeah I saw this one at denvention
and this one was for Delaney's book yeah this has a curious story to it Byron
Price the publisher called me up and told me he was doing a book of short
stories by Samuel R. Delaney he said I could do anything I wanted for the cover
so I said great and I sat down and I came up with oh maybe eight really
what's the word I felt they were spectacular concepts for this cover but they
were rather semi-mystical and feeling and they didn't go for any of them and so
they sent me a sketch of what they wanted for the cover and it showed a man
coming coming into a porthole on one side and a woman in a lacy nightgown on the
back cover waiting for a man to come home it was terrible so this is what they
got and I I joked with them and said that we'll really be liberated when they
put the woman on the front for a change and the man on the back but they're both
coming home from work in essence is what they're doing and granted you see raw
space behind them but that's you know I say it's because there's a glass
enclosed bubble on the outside but the other reason I had for doing this
painting is I was driving down a highway once and I went under a bridge on
either side of the bridge they had these signs of these yellow and black marks
on them you know on either side and I was struck just by the imagery of these
symmetrical orange and black stripes on either side of this bridge and that's
pretty much how the composition for the painting came about was just that mental
image and then constructing the lights to give the feeling that this painting
has there's a little bit of airbrush work in this painting also especially just
to create a glare effect around the lights and the background here okay this is
one of my buddy favorites over here yeah this was an illustration for a poem by
Robert E. Howard that never got published and hence the name of the painting is
The Mad Poet and what you have here is a man in a dark room being illuminated by
by Luna the moon and the substance of his mad dreams is seen in the floating
smoke and there's all little demons and creatures in the smoke there coming out
of the candle that's the light has been extinguished also it's all symbolic
metaphorical stuff indicating his state of mind but these are all paintings by
the way that I didn't use any models for or anything I used
the model for that one there but you know you asked me about that you know I
just wanted to point that out The Amazing Dragon this painting here was
commissioned from me by TSR Hobbies who bought out Amazing Stories magazine and
they wanted to kick off their new acquisition as it were with a cover that
symbolized both elements of fantasy and science fiction so I used the astronaut
as a symbol of science fiction and dragon as a symbol of fantasy just put them
together in a visually interesting way sounds easy doesn't it it is really yeah
it took a long time definitely
also I'd always wanted to develop a black dragon after doing the white dragon
and this was the first opportunity I had to do that so that was another reason
why I wanted to do the painting equal opportunity for dragons yes excuse me
this fellow looks a little like you he doesn't really I mean he doesn't have my
profile everyone says that why I don't know he came out of my head so it could
be there's some of me in there but it wasn't my intention to do so so if that's
true it was accidental you are in CJ Cherryh's cover on it yeah that is you out
of around 200 paintings I've put myself in three of them I think three or four
that I know about maybe unintentionally I didn't I put myself in there I was
away in England for six weeks or so and I hadn't touched a pencil to a paper or
brushed a canvas or anything that whole time I didn't even think about painting
well I mean I did when I went to an art gallery or whatever but I didn't think
about myself painting at all and when I came back quite frankly I wasn't sure I
still had it in me you know I felt very strange when I came back after all that
time and I sat down this pain just kind of came out of me without any effort at
all and it really felt good it was just a reassurance I needed to get back into
doing what I was doing so I had a really good feeling about it well you know
after that long period after a couple of months like who knows you know I don't
know I don't take anything for granted but right a lot of my work I feel like a
lot of my work is trial and error anyway so I don't know you know I have a bad
memory about a lot of things some things I've got a good photographic memory
towards visual information but about
procedures and conceptual things sometimes I'm pretty forgetful and so I don't
you know who knows that's why a lot of my artwork looks different from one piece
to the other because I think it's more that I forget from one painting to
another how to do a painting than it is that I deliberately try to vary it there
are artists like Norman Rockwell who developed a stylistic technique for doing a
painting back when they were 18 or something and never varied from that for
their entire lifetime it was always you did this and then you did this and then
you did this and then you did this and then you did this and you had a painting
and I never I never have a set standard I never have a set procedure the way I
did this painting is totally different from the way I did this one from the way
I did that one from that from that from that I mean I think I have it down to
about eight different approaches now probably but it doesn't make it easier it
definitely adds time to the time it takes to do a painting and the mental
anguish also
you said you used the model on this one no not this one this one this one I used
the same model for both figures because they are supposed to be twins but she's
a girl named Carrie she posed for me for that particular painting not for this
one I did there's hardly a need to because she's all covered in armor
this one here is Amazon just for the benefit of anyone listening to this we're
talking about Amazons and Amazons too these are both books about women warriors
you can see quite a variation of color can't you from this to this look at the
color of the moon here and the yellowish cast here it's been completely lost
that's something that's hard for an artist to deal with is the loss of quality
and reproduction on book covers yeah I heard that's not much you can do about it
I heard that some of the publishers are going to try and switch over to a laser
printing method which is much more accurate maybe so did you
doing this one is that what brought you the second one yes sometimes I found
that I'd become a bargaining chip for the publishers they'll tell an author well
if you if you let us shave a thousand dollars off of the money our royalties
that we're supposed to pay you for a particular job we'll let you have a way on
the cover so you sell more books anyway and get the money back you know so we'll
take the money off your advance and just add percentage on your royalties and
they'll agree to that in advance because the author has published on a cover by
me and this I think that happened in this particular instance well actually I
shouldn't say that because I don't know for certain it's just been a rumor that
I heard these are both books about women warriors and I use the moon as a symbol
of femininity both in this case and in this one here where you have the moon
beginning to eclipse the sun it's a symbol of femininity over masculinity here
because they're attacking a ship there was indeed a Chinese a female pirate in
the China Seas in the 1800s who did terrify and plunder many ships with her crew
and she in fact retired to live out a long life in China but is that that vague
concept that brought about this painting yeah I'm going to buy the print of that
one I was thinking that just to carry this idea on further when I read about
this Chinese female Chinese pirate and her crew of Amazons plundering Portuguese
and Spanish ships in the China Seas among Japanese ships or whatever I thought
how interesting their armor must have looked because they would have acquired
different bits and pieces from all these different types of countries and so
she's got a Portuguese dagger and western style chain mail and yet this one has
a more Japanese type of covering over the upper part of her torso and this is
more oriental and feeling this armor here and here also Do you do much study in
ancient weaponry and stuff like that? Not a whole lot I mean I when I go go to
another country or something I'll go to a museum to try to pick up well not just
another country when I go anywhere that has an armor museum I'll try to go and
see it and study it but it's almost always buying class cases so they can't get
a good photograph of it and all that so I have to rely on my memory mostly I've
got a few books on it that helps to bring back my recollection of what it looked
like the best thing about going I remember the first time I went to a museum
that had armor in it just to look at the armor and what a revelation was to see
how it's strapped up from behind I mean obviously you can't always show somebody
from the front if you don't know how it ties together in the back you're really
sunk you know the way that it buckles up and everything behind the legs and all
that that was really important to me to figure that out but once I saw how it
goes generally it's pretty much the same for all armor yeah you never want to
fight somebody and have somebody come from behind you and have armor on yeah
you're only a tank from the front generally yeah that's true
don't forget 1230 David gee 1230 no no it's a long time just don't forget I
think we're about to finish here I'm going to turn myself off
never again will that happen no way when you paint a cover like this you retain
all the ranks right absolutely all I sell is first one time non-exclusive North
American English language paperback cover art rights or hardcover art rights or
whatever everything else is mine so I have an agent in Germany who sells
European rights that will sell rights to companies in Japan or whatever and
they'll be able to use the artwork otherwise it's not much of a living you know
you have to kind of that is pretty much how you have to supplement it and then
the final sell of the artwork will bring bring in added revenues but
I'm being told time and time again that I'm pretty much at the top of my
profession if this is the top it doesn't say much for it you know because there
isn't a tremendous amount of money to be made doing paperback covers or book
covers unless you're exceedingly fast and you can turn them out now there's the
guy who did the cover for Shogun and a bunch of other books he does over a
hundred covers a year you know so if he makes fifteen hundred a cover he you
know he's making a pretty respectable living but I do two a month two to four a
month tops you know so that's one quarter of his output does that does your
revenue coming back from the publishers come in the form of like royalty or just
a straight a straight payment I would not there have been publishers that have
tried to get not publishers there have been a couple of small publishers that
talk to royalties and some artists ridiculously enough are fighting for that for
a royalty type of system but publishers are really never going to go for that
because they don't want the added bookkeeping I mean it's already a nightmare
for the authors to try to collect on their royalties for the artists it would be
totally ridiculous and I want my money now you know I'm not going to trust them
to pay me because I've had too many times when I've had royalty arrangements
either as an author or as an artist and a few other books that I've had to hire
lawyers to go out to the publishers to collect and everything and by the time I
go through all this rigmarole I might as well just have thrown it away you know
I've lost more than I've gained so I definitely would not want to see a royalty
system and I think if a publisher wants to institute some way of paying an
artist back for a book that sells really well they've got to just have a bonus
type of thing if you do really good you get paid a straight fee but if it gets
on the bestseller list you get an added fee or whatever that'd be a good way to
do it you've written some also? well I have a book of my own artwork called
Wonderworks and it's got a little bit of writing by me and we're starting to
work on the second Wonderworks now in fact I just picked up my quote for the
opening page in my second book so I feel like I'm really on my way to getting
the book done now if words weren't going to go with that would you pay?
absolutely yeah that's the limitation of doing book covers is that you do have
graphic design considerations in terms of the type the title and all that kind
of stuff I'm probably less constrained by that than other artists because
they're willing to kind of work around how I do it but I'm always conscious of
it so things get bottom weighted so that there's room on top for type and I'm
used to it and it's always it's a constant challenge and when I'm doing a
wraparound cover one that goes over the spine onto the back then I get a chance
to do a horizontal format and I get a lot of those jobs and I
make sure to take once or twice a year an assignment where I'm doing interior
illustrations where I don't have to be worried about type at all and when I do
if I ever get a chance do things for myself of course then I don't have to worry
about type either but I don't I never give myself time to do something just for
myself unfortunately I mean all my illustrations are for myself because I
consider myself an illustrator more than anything but I would like to do
something where I don't have to worry about any consideration at all type or
design format or public standards of taste or decency or anything and I'm just
completely paint exactly what comes into my mind exactly the way I see it
without any considerations once in a while have you considered doing an art book
along those lines no not really it's out of my I wouldn't consider it simply
because I wouldn't give myself the time to there's too many good books I want to
illustrate that I wouldn't want to take the amount of time it would take to do a
whole art book of just pieces I've done entirely for myself it would be a 25
year process probably to do something like that and
I don't know I don't think I'd want to be involved in something that long term I
don't think I'll even be I'm not even sure I'll be painting that long from now I
may develop another interest between now and then so who knows
one hopes you won't give it up entirely I doubt it I don't think I'll ever give
up illustrating I certainly won't give up painting and one thing I know I'll
always be doing is rendering a human figure that's probably the core of my
interest in art so I'll be kicking around for a few years to come anyway thank
you